\section{Implementation}

\subsection{Programming language}
For this project, performance was a prime goal and thus the only contemplated 
programming languages were C and C++.  Originally, we decided to implement the 
project in C++. It seemed to us that the clear distinction between the system, 
a partition and a particle lent itself well to an object-oriented programming 
language. Another advantage was the Standard Template Library (STL) which 
provided us with an efficient doubly linked list.

The nature of the problem, on the other hand, did not lend itself too well to 
OOP. For this reason, we decided to switch to C. This conversion only took an 
hour and the imperative paradigm seemed more fit to develop a performant 
program in a reasonable amount of time.

\subsection{Data structures}

The project needed a lot of manipulation of vector quantities, like position 
and velocity. For this we used the following straightforward C structure

\begin{lstlisting}
struct Vec3 {
	float x, y, z;
};
\end{lstlisting}

A particle is represented by its position and velocity. The particles needs to 
be contained in box so we store them in a circular doubly-linked list.
\begin{lstlisting}
struct Particle {
	Vec3 pos;
	Vec3 vel;
	struct Particle *prev, *next;
};
\end{lstlisting}
In this case, a box is little more than a pointer to any particle it contains.  
For various reasons, we keep track of the amount of particles in each box.
\begin{lstlisting}
struct Box {
	Particle *p;
	int n;
};
\end{lstlisting}

The parameters for the system are given to the program by commandline 
arguments. Methods to benchmark the performance of the program are also built 
in the software. The scripts used to gather the data are in the same repository 
as the code.

At the start of the program the world is filled with a given amount of 
particles. The amount of time this procedure takes not added to the benchmark 
results.  Then, either the system is rendered graphically for debugging 
purposes, or it loops a set amount of iterations. Optionally, the positions and 
velocities of each particle are saved. This way, we can plot a distribution of 
the speed or demonstrate Brownian motion, convincing one that our model is 
simulated physically correct.
